Testing our apis (#11)
Ada-Developers-Academy/core-unit-2: testing-our-apis/using-tests.md

| --------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `def test_get_all_books_with_no_records( ... ):`    | Continuing our best pytest practices, this test should start with the name `test_`, and it should describe the nature of this test |
| `..._no_records(client):`                           | We pass in the `client` fixture here. pytest will automatically search and detect the fixture with the same name                   |
| `client.get("/books")`                              | This sends an HTTP request to `/books`. It returns an HTTP response object, which we store in our local variable `response`        |
| `response_body = response.get_json()`               | We can get the JSON response body with `response.get_json()`                                                                       |
| `assert response.status_code == 200`                | Every `response` object will have a `status_code`. We can read that status code and check it against the expected status code.     |

> | `assert response_body == []`                        | We can check all of the parts of response body that we need to verify. We can check it's contents, size, values, etc!              |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `assert response_body == []`                        | We can check all of the parts of the response body that we need to verify. We can check its contents, size, values, etc!              |
```

> Add this test to `tests/test_routes.py`, and now let's run them!

Reviewer: so far only one test
```suggestion
Add this test to `tests/test_routes.py`, and let's run it!
```

## Running Tests

> To run the tests, we use:

Reviewer: emphasize that we run this the same way as other tests
```suggestion
To run our Flask tests, we can use the same methods as for any other test. From the command line we can run:
```

```bash
(venv) $ pytest
```

> 

Reviewer: give vs code as an option
```suggestion
Or we can run them through the VS Code test panel.

```

We should see this already-implemented route pass!

![Screenshot of pytest test result: 1 test passed](../assets/testing-apis/testing-apis_passing-get-books.png)

> Notice that we do _not_ need to run the Flask server to run the tests!

Reviewer: this is ok, but I feel like since we're talking about something that just happened, we should use past tense
```suggestion
Notice that we did _not_ need to run the Flask server to run the tests!
```

### Verify Broken Tests Can Fail

We haven't seen a failing test yet, because we are writing tests for already built functionality.

Let's verify that we can trust our tests to fail, by making them fail temporarily.

> Let's go to our `app/routes.py` file and temporarily break our `/books` endpoint. One way we can break this route is to return a response with a status code `418` immediately.

Reviewer: I feel like immediately on its own is sort of floating there, like does it mean we should make the change right now, or should that be the first line of the function (we want the latter meaning, but it feels more like the former)
```suggestion
Let's go to our `app/routes.py` file and temporarily break our `/books` endpoint. One way we can break this route is to return a response with a status code `418` before doing anything else in the function.
```

```python
@books_bp.route("", methods=["GET", "POST"])

> def books():

Reviewer: update according to function renaming
```suggestion
def handle_books():
```

>     return Response("This is one broken response!", status=418)

Reviewer: Let's go all in on I'm a teapot. It might get the reader to search for what's going on with this code, which is amusing. The subsequent text in the lesson isn't affected by this change.
```suggestion
    return Response("I'm a teapot!", status=418)
```

The test fails! We can read through these test failures and see that our test _expected_ a status code of `200`, but _actually_ got status `418`.

### !callout-secondary

## Revert Those Changes

Revert the changes that made the test fail, and return Hello Books back to a working state!

### !end-callout

## Tests That Need Test Data

Let's consider a second test in `tests/test_routes.py`.

When we make a `GET` request to `/books/1`, we expect a response of `200`, with a JSON response body.

The JSON response body should include the keys `"id"`, `"title"`, and `"description"`.

```python
def test_get_one_book(client):
    # Act
    response = client.get("/books/1")
    response_body = response.get_json()

    # Assert
    assert response.status_code == 200
    assert response_body == {
        "id": "",
        "title": "",
        "description": ""
    }
```

However, this test isn't complete yet...

If we run this test right now, we actually get a 404!

![Screenshot of pytest test result: test_get_one_book fails because of AssertionError, which checks if 404 is equal to 200](../assets/testing-apis/testing-apis_404-get-books-1.png)

Why would we get a `404` response?

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

<br />

```

<details style="max-width: 700px; margin: auto;">
    <summary>
        Expand this section to follow a debugging interlude!
    </summary>

Why would we get a `404` response?

Let's follow these debugging steps:

<!--
    These bullets aren't numbered lists because
    Galvanize Learn doesn't keep their formatting,
    even if we manually number them.
 -->

- First, let's confirm we understand what the test is doing:

```python
def test_get_one_book(client):
    response = client.get("/books/1")
```

> Our test made a `GET` request to `/books/1`. A `GET` to `/books/1` can only mean that our test made a request to our `book()` route.

Reviewer: update for function renaming
```suggestion
Our test made a `GET` request to `/books/1`. A `GET` to `/books/1` matches the `/books/<book_id>` route with the `GET` method. This is mapped to our `handle_book()` function.
```

> - Let's visit our `book()` route:

Reviewer: update for function renaming
```suggestion
- Let's revisit our `handle_book()` function:
```

```python
@books_bp.route("/<book_id>", methods=["GET", "PUT", "DELETE"])

> def book(book_id):

Reviewer: update for function renaming
```suggestion
def handle_book(book_id):
```

    book = Book.query.get(book_id)
    if book == None:
        return Response("", status=404)
    # ... rest of our route
```

> Our `book()` route returns a `404` response if `book` is `None`.

Reviewer: update for function renaming
```suggestion
Our `handle_book()` function returns a `404` response if `book` is `None`.
```

- Let's consider why `book` might have a value of `None`.

>   1.  What is the most line of code that most recently affected `book`?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  1.  What is the line of code that most recently affected `book`?
```

  1.  `book` is assigned a value in the line before, `book = Book.query.get(book_id)`.
  1.  `Book.query.get(book_id)` must have returned `None`.

> Why would `Book.query.get(book_id)` return `None`? What are the reasons it behaved that way?

Reviewer: consider posing this in a more investigative tone
```suggestion
Why would `Book.query.get(book_id)` return `None`? What could cause it to behave that way?
```

> - Let's dive into `Book.query.get(book_id)`.

Reviewer: we don't really get to see inside of this method, so phrase this a little differently
```suggestion
- What do we know about how `Book.query.get(book_id)` works?
```

  1.  The responsibility of this method is to return an instance of `Book` that has the primary key of `book_id`.
  1.  This method returns `None` when no `Book` with that id was found!

> Our debugging questions can continue in this line of thought:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our debugging questions can continue along this line of thought:
```

1. Why is there no book that was found?
1. Where is the test looking for books?
1. Is the test (and the `app` object made in `create_app()`) set to look at the correct database?
1. Are our environment variables accessed and set correctly?

> 1. Can we access our test database and check the contents of it in `psql`?
> 1. Is what we see inside our test database consistent with the test error?

Reviewer: this is going require some discussion and because the database contents are dropped after each test, checking the db state is tough... So generalize this. The next change will address how to draw the final conclusion.
```suggestion
1. Are there any books in the test database?
```

> At this point, we should see that our test database has no book records inside of it.

Reviewer: just looking in the db won't provide any useful info at this point, so walk through the thought experiment that will allow us to understand why the test is failing.
```suggestion
This final question is harder to confirm than might be expected! In the Test Setup lesson, we very briefly looked at the `app` fixture. But the full significance of the `db.create_all()` and `db.drop_all()` lines within the fixture may not have been apparent.

At the start of _each_ test, `db.create_all()` will rebuild the entire test database, creating all the tables needed for our models. Crucially, these tables begin _empty_!

Then at the end of _each_ test, `db.drop_all()` deletes _all_ the tables from the database. This prevents any test data created during one test from contaminating later tests. But this also means that if a test is not actively running, the test database will appear to be _completely_ empty! We won't even see empty tables. There will be _no_ tables!

Using our ability to debug tests with breakpoints though VS Code, it _is_ possible to pause during the middle of a test, which would give us a chance to connect to the test database and check on its state. This can be very helpful for more complicated tests!

But for the time being, we need only apply the knowledge that `db.create_all()` recreates the test database tables in an empty state at the start of each test.

This means that when we try to get the `Book` with a primary key of `1`, no `Book` is found. `Book.query.get(book_id)` returns `None`, resulting in the `404 Not Found` response status code and the failure of our test!
```

</details>

> To address our test failure, let's see one way to populate the test database.

Reviewer: looking at is more active than seeing
```suggestion
To address our test failure, let's look at one way to populate the test database!
```

## Adding Test Data with Fixtures

> We'll define parts of our "Arrange" sections inside of pytest fixtures.

Reviewer: mention other methods we could approach this, but then give a reason why fixtures is a better fit here
```suggestion
We could write code directly in our test to create data as part of our "Arrange" section. We could write helper functions if this data needs to be shared with other tests.

Or by using fixtures instead, we get data reusability and we explicitly list the data dependencies our test has!
```

> Let's consider how we'll use fixtures to add test data:

Reviewer: rephrase to acknowledge that we have discussed the generalities of fixtures already.
```suggestion
Let's review some of the characteristics of fixtures, and consider how we can use them to add test data:
```

> | Question              | Answer                                                                                                                                         |

Reviewer: wrapping format
```suggestion
| <div style="min-width:100px;">Question</div>              | Answer                                                                                                                                         |
```

| --------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | What are fixtures?    | Each pytest fixture we define will describe something we want to happen before the test, such as saving test data.                             |

Reviewer: future sounds like we haven't seen how this works at all yet, but we have. so present sounds more general.
```suggestion
| What are fixtures?    | Each pytest fixture we define describes something we want to happen before a test. We could define a fixture that creates test data.                             |
```

> | Where do fixtures go? | The fixtures can be defined in any file (such as `tests/test_routes.py`), but we will define most of our routes inside of `tests/conftest.py`. |

Reviewer: routes → fixtures
give some minimal justification for why we're putting our fixtures there 
```suggestion
| Where do fixtures go? | Fixtures can be defined in any file (such as `tests/test_routes.py`), but we will define most of our fixtures inside of `tests/conftest.py`. This automatically allows them to be used in multiple test files if needed. |
```

> | Who uses them?        | Each test will state which fixtures they want to use, and each test can use multiple fixtures!                                                 |

Reviewer: now each of the previous rows is following a two-sentence pattern, so continue that here. I think this also helps emphasize the multiple fixture part.
```suggestion
| Who uses them?        | Each test states which fixtures they want to use. Each test can use multiple fixtures!                                                 |
```

### Example Fixture: Creating Two Books

A lot of our tests need at least one book defined in our database. Inside of `tests/conftest.py`, we can make a fixture that saves two books to the database:

```python
@pytest.fixture
def two_saved_books(app):
    # Arrange
    ocean_book = Book(title="Ocean Book",
                      description="watr 4evr")
    mountain_book = Book(title="Mountain Book",
                         description="i luv 2 climb rocks")

    db.session.add_all([ocean_book, mountain_book])
    # Alternatively, we could do
    # db.session.add(ocean_book)
    # db.session.add(mountain_book)
    db.session.commit()
```

| <div style="min-width:250px;"> Piece of Code </div> | Notes                                                                                                         |
| --------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `@pytest.fixture`                                   | Each fixture starts with this decorator                                                                       |

> | `def two_saved_books(...):`                         | We can name our fixtures whatever we want. `two_saved_books` is good enough, although we could think of more! |

Reviewer: what makes it good enough?
```suggestion
| `def two_saved_books( ... ):`                         | We can name our fixtures whatever we want. `two_saved_books` is a reasonable name that will help remind us what this fixture does. |
```

> | `def two_saved_books(app):`                         | This fixture needs to request to use the `app` fixture, defined above, so we have access to our Flask app     |

Reviewer: follow previous explanations that list the params alone
the app fixture is in a previous lesson, not above in this lesson
we don't actually use the app param, but it's still important and we can say why (interestingly, because of the fixture param ordering, we can leave off app and it will still work, but it's still probably better to list the explicit dependency)
```suggestion
| `app`                         | This fixture needs to request the use of the `app` fixture, defined previously, so we know the test database has been initialized.     |
```

| `ocean_book = ...`                                  | We can make our first `Book` instance...                                                                      |
| `mountain_book = ...`                               | ... and our second `Book` instance                                                                            |
| `db.session.add_all([ ... , ... ])`                 | We can use the `add_all()` function to add a list of instances                                                |

> | `db.session.commit()`                               | This line commits and saves our book to the database                                                          |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `db.session.commit()`                               | This line commits and saves our books to the database                                                          |
```

#### Requesting Fixtures in Tests

> To actually use this fixture in a test, we need to request this fixture by name.

Reviewer: repeated "this fixture" sounds odd, and since we've had a whole lesson on fixtures, I don't think we need the repetition here.
```suggestion
To actually use this fixture in a test, we need to request it by name.
```

```python
def test_get_one_book(client, two_saved_books):
    # Act
    response = client.get("/books/1")
    # ...
```

We must add the `two_saved_books` fixture to our test's parameters. We can comma-separate as many fixtures as this single test needs.

#### Completing Our Test

We've set up tests, we've created a test fixture, and we've made sure our tests used the test fixture. But our test still fails!

We get this test failure:

```
E       AssertionError: assert {'description... 'Ocean Book'} == {'description..., 'title': ''}
E         Differing items:
E         {'title': 'Ocean Book'} != {'title': ''}
E         {'id': 1} != {'id': ''}
E         {'description': 'watr 4evr'} != {'description': ''}
E         Use -v to get the full diff
```

![Screenshot of pytest test result: test_get_one_book failed because of AssertionError between two book dictionaries](../assets/testing-apis/testing-apis_failing-fixture-comparison.png)

> We should conclude that we need to update our test itself, finally! Let's fill in the expected test dictionary back in `tests/test_routes.py`. It should be consistent with whatever data we put in our fixture.

Reviewer: provide an explanation for how to interpret the test results
"should" sounds a little judgmental in the case that I the reader wasn't able to arrive at that conclusion on my own.
```suggestion
The output shows that the data coming back from our API looks reasonable, but that the value we are comparing to in our test has empty strings for each dictionary value.

We can conclude that we need to update our test itself, finally! Let's fill in the expected test dictionary values back in `tests/test_routes.py`. It should be consistent with whatever data we put in our fixture.
```
